---
title: The Second Part
weight:300
type: essay
---

## The Second Part: Mexico

#### El Portillo Farm

The El Portillo farm was the most distant of the properties of Mr. Luttman. In addition to El Portillo, Mr. Luttman also owned Maravillas, San Enrique, Génova and Independence Farms. The farm was not far from the highway between Huixtla and Tapachula but the land on the farm was rough with many canyons and large hills of enormous rocks. The farm was ten kilometers from Maravillas and in the municipality of Tuzantán. The closest city was Huixtla.

My family lived in the main house that was made of wood. It was very large with two great porches and a swimming pool of normal size with all the most indispensable comforts. The farm office was located across a roadway from the house. Mr. Luttman did not maintain a house on the farm. For general lighting and to drive electric motors for the coffee facility and the kitchen, there was a hydroelectric plant and a stand-by steam generator in case of emergency. We never lacked electricity day or night, summer or winter.

The farm had a large kitchen, complete with a mill with an electric motor for grinding corn and a machine to make tortillas. Attached to the kitchen was the dining room with large tables and benches for the use of the itinerant workers who, during the period of the harvest, numbered 500 more or less. The kitchen personnel consisted of a cook with his respective helpers, one for every 100 workers or fraction thereof. The kitchen staff began their work at 2 or 3 o’clock in the morning. At 5:00AM the workers were already making a line to receive breakfast. At two in the afternoon, the noon meal began to be served. On Wednesday beef, soup with chayote, potatoes and fried rice and chili peppers was served. When there was no meat or few people, they were given a cylindrical can of mackerel instead of meat. During the time of the harvest, the workers were not charged for the food.

The itinerant workers were given low-cost food that consisted of a spoonful of beans, coffee, chili peppers and 25 tortillas each. This was for the breakfast that they ate in the fields. They were also given a ball of cooked cracked corn that they used to make a drink that they called ‘posole’. They drank this at mid-day to quench their thirst and at the same time to complement their nutrition. To make ‘posole’, they broke up the ball of corn and placed it in an ordinary pot to make a thick or thin drink according to their taste.

All the farms had health centers staffed by nurses attached to the Mexican Institute of Social Insurance and, at certain places in each farming area, there were hospitals with medical, pharmacy and nursing personnel. Only patients that needed surgery or specialized medicine were taken in IMSS ambulances to hospitals in Tapachula or Huixtla. Our purchases for personal use and our banking operations were done in Huixtla. Only large orders of tools for cultivation, fertilizers and some other items came from Tapachula.

Our children were enrolled in Catholic schools in Tapachula. The boys were enrolled in ‘Miguel Hidalgo’ and the girls in ‘Constancia y Trabajo’. The first school was run by the religious order of La Salle and the second by the Guadalupe Sisters. Both schools were the best in Tapachula. The five children boarded at the schools and came to the farm every two weeks to spend the weekend. The first year, they suffered a lot because the majority of their fellow students were Mexicans. The other students laughed at them and called them by the derogatory name of ‘cachucos’ because of the fact that they were Guatemalans. But with the passing of the years that antagonism disappeared and they made very good friends. Their friendships endured until they were adults.

### 1959: El Portillo

The coffee facility where the coffee beans are processed was a long distance over rough terrain from the coffee plantings. The workers were required to make the return trip on foot with the load of coffee slung from their back. As a result, experienced men preferred to go to other farms where they found better conditions. In an effort to mitigate this problem, Mr. Luttman arranged entertainment consisting of a marimba concert on Saturday nights. The workers, men and women, used the coffee drying floors as the dance floor.

There was a person called the Land Ranger whose job was to guard the plantings and the borders of the farm. His mission was to travel around the farm armed with a rifle to prevent robbery or damage to the plantings as well as the help the municipal volunteers and the police maintain order. A recent arrival to the farm, a young man from San Marcos, Guatemala whose name was Fausto Borralles, a very serious and reliable man, was hired for this job. One Saturday night, while celebrating the usual dance on the drying floors, a small group of workers, about half drunk, began insulting and slapping each other. Borralles quickly appeared with several policemen to restore order. Suddenly, a shot was fired and the Land Ranger collapsed. The rumpus stopped. No one knew who fired the shot. They didn’t seem to place much importance on what had happened.

At that moment, I was with the planner of the farm, the young man Adolfo Sonderegger. We immediately went over to the wounded man who we found semi-conscious and bathed in blood. The municipal volunteers also came forward. We arranged to carry him to the hospital in Huixtla where he was admitted to the emergency room and placed in the care of the nurses. This was around midnight. The surgery began on the following day around ten o’clock in the morning and ended at two o’clock in the afternoon. The surgeons found seven holes in his intestines. The gun that was used to shoot him was a shotgun loaded with pellets. Luckily the operation was successful and he recovered in relatively little time without further complications. Later it was learned that a worker named Agustín, whose last name I don’t remember but who was originally from Sanatepec in Oaxaca, shot the Guatemalan Borralles with the intention of killing him. There was no apparent motive. The shooter soon returned to the town from where he came and the matter came to an end.

#### Trip to Veracruz

In the middle of June, I went on vacation accompanied only by my wife Elisa since the children were all in school. We boarded the train in Tapachula to go to Veracruz. In those days, the service on the railroad was very good with Pullman cars fitted with private berths for sleeping and with all the conveniences. We stayed in Veracruz three days and saw the city and its environs such as San Juan de Ulua where Chucho El Roto was a prisoner. We also got to see the inside of a Russian vessel that was tied up at one of the wharves.

From there we went to Puebla by bus where we stayed in a hotel in the center of the city. We stayed in Puebla four days getting to know the most important places, Cholula, some spas, etc. The third leg of the trip was the City of Mexico. We stayed in the Cathedral Hotel. The first places we visited were the Villa of Guadalupe, Xochimilco gardens and Chapultepec Park. We attended a performance of Swan Lake by the French Ballet in the Palace of Fine Arts and went various times to the Blanquita theatre seeing shows by Marco Antonio Muñiz, Manolo Muñoz and Rocio Durcal, all of who were in the early stages of their artistic careers. It was the happiest vacation that I can remember.

Months earlier my wife told me that on the lower part of one of her breasts a small ball had appeared, similar to a grain of rice. She felt no pain and when touched it moved as if it was floating between the skin and the flesh. She showed it to me and, in our ignorance, the only thing that occurred to us to do was to treat it with applications of Yodex, an iodine-based cream. With the passage of time, she began to feel some pain including headache, pain in the back and in the arms and difficulty breathing. She went to see various physicians in Huixtla but, although she felt better for a few days after each visit, the pains returned in different forms. The nodule on her breast was getting bigger but from modesty and ignorance she said nothing about it to the physicians.

### The Sixth Decade: San Enrique

#### 1960

Fidel Castro took power in Cuba after overthrowing the dictator Fulgencio Batista. Scientists in the United States developed the Laser.

At El Portillo, Mr. Noé Pinto, 56 to 58-years of age and originally from Comitán, worked as foreman in the field. He was the owner of a ranch (really a small farm) in the neighborhood of Maravillas where his wife and children lived. Every Saturday upon finishing his work, he went on horseback to spend the weekend with his family, returning Sunday in the afternoon. He was very competent and treated subordinates calmly with good manners. One day, when he and his men were planting coffee trees, he saw that an elderly worker Manuel Hernández was not doing the work correctly. He calmly told the man what he saw, explained how he was to do the work and that was all. The day ended without any other problems. Three days later, at about four o’clock on Saturday afternoon, Mr. Pinto saddled a horse and left for his house. Less than an hour later, the truck driver came by and said that Mr. Pinto had been found upside down in a ditch without signs of life.

I immediately ordered the planner, Adolfo Sonderegger, to get the farm’s pick-up truck and, in the company of the municipal volunteer and several policemen, we went to see what had happened. At the same time, I called on the telephone to the Maravillas farm to tell them what was happening.

The facts of what happened were as follows. While Mr. Pinto was riding on the most deserted stretch of the road, someone fired a shot from a thicket from a shotgun loaded with large caliber shot. Mr. Pinto was hit in the back and fell from the horse near a ditch. The authorities found him lying on the side of the ditch with his fully loaded pistol lying at his feet. The police deduced that he took out the pistol to defend himself but that he died instantly and did not have time to defend himself.

After a detailed search in the homes of people who owned shotguns, they suspected the worker, Manuel Hernández, from the El Portillo farm. He was handed over to the Justice of the Peace and found guilty of the murder of Mr. Pinto. They adduced that he did it because he was embarrassed when he was reprimanded in front of his fellow-workers when they were planting coffee trees. Mr. Hernández was sentenced to ten years in prison.

Our good friend, Carlos W. Lehnhoff, was the legal representative, trustee and general manager of the farms, coffee processing plants and other businesses that Mr. Juan C. Luttman possessed in the state of Chiapas. Usually there is no lack of backstabbing and jealousies among the employees at the top of a business hierarchy. This happened to Mr. Lehnhoff because of the fact that he was a Guatemalan. Certain employees at a lower level with more longevity in their jobs thought that they were untouchable and had more rights because of the fact that they were Mexicans.

Mr. Lehnhoff was very strict with the employees in general. He demanded punctuality, a neat appearance and competence but he was, at the same time, under-standing, generous and friendly with his subordinates. For example, all of the work that the craftsmen did outside of normal work hours was paid double time.

Several of the office workers who were members of the Old Guard- as they were called (and whose names I will not say) -were brain-washing Mr. Luttman trying to make him to believe that Mr. Lehnhoff was spending too much on fertilizers, insecticides and fungicides. These employees were not taking into consideration the high yields from the farms and the better conditions of hygiene and comfort in the worker’s housing. To make a long story short, one day Mr. Luttman complained to Mr. Lehnhoff that expenses were very high and it would be a good thing to decrease the use of insecticides and fertilizers. After a while, Mr. Lehnhoff handed in his resignation and returned with all of his family to Guatemala. He took the job of manager of the Helvetia Farm in the neighborhood of Retalhuleu.

The German Enrique Besche was named to fill the vacant post left by Mr. Lehnhoff’s departure except that he was not given the status of trustee, only that of General Manager. Mr. Besche vacated the position of manager of the San Enrique Farm. It is possible that it was coincidental that at that same time Mr. Mario Lopezlena purchased the El Portillo farm. Before selling the farm, Mr. Luttman spoke to me and said that if I wanted to quit and return to my country he would forgive any debts I owned him. If I wanted to continue working in his business I was to let him know. For my part, I told him that I was satisfied with his good treatment and I was disposed to continue in his service. For this reason, when Mr. Besche became the general manager of the enterprise, I was assigned to manage the San Enrique Farm.

#### San Enrique Farm

The San Enrique Farm was better situated than El Portillo. It was surrounded with good neighbors and easily accessible both from Huixtla and Tapachula. It was adjacent to the Las Maravillas Farm and was in the municipality of Tapachula. In addition, it had a powerful hydroelectric plant that supplied electricity to both San Enrique and Maravillas farms.

The manager’s living quarters at the San Enrique farm were of recent construction with large glass windows and a porch in the front. The house had a large garden in front of it. Across the street from the house was the office, the house of the farm’s planner and a guest room.

When I took charge of the farm, Mr. Luttman told me that it would be desirable to provide entertainment for the workers in the form of weekend movies. Mr. Antonio Colunga Espinoza, the general accountant of the business who lived at the Maravillas Farm, was already doing this at the Maravillas and Génova farms. About that time, Mr. Colunga’s office was moved to Tapachula. He owned two Victor-brand movie projectors with speakers and a microphone on a stand. He sold one projector to Guillermo Cancinos, a foreman at Maravillas, and I purchased the other at a good price. He gave me the microphone.

Next to the rural settlement at Maravillas was an exhibition room that had been used as a warehouse for fertilizer. We cleaned it out and filled the building with benches that the schoolteacher loaned me. I ordered 25 wooden box seats from the El Portillo Farm carpenter, Sabino Hernández, and placed them alongside the benches. We rented 16mm films from the distributor in Veracruz. A long time before the screening, a list of the available films was sent to us specifying if they were in English or Spanish, the price and the actors. The films arrived by train on Friday and we returned them on Tuesday. Western movies drew large audiences as well as movies starring Pedro Infante, Jorge Negrete and Javier Solis. The price of entry was $2 pesos for adults and $1 peso for children.

Another purchase that I made from Mr. Antonio Colunga was a Jeep that was well kept and served me for a long time. The price was $10,000 pesos in cash. During the years that I worked on the El Portillo and San Enrique farms, the value of the Mexican peso was stable. The peso stayed at $12.50 for one US dollar. Years before we moved to Mexico, I sold a small house that I had on Campo Seco Alley, near the Merced Church in Antigua Guatemala. Mr. Bartolome Azmitia Frener bought it for Q. 3,500. I deposited the money in the Bank of America where I opened a checking account. For this reason, we had cash reserves in Guatemala that we used to purchase household effects when we arrived in Chiapas as well as to purchase the Jeep and the movie projector.

When we arrived at San Enrique, the first friends we made was the Quiñonez Armendariz family composed of Mr. Carlos Quiñoñez, his wife Mrs. Alicia Armendariz and their five children: Malicha, Lupita, Cristi, Carlitos and Pepe. Mr. Quinoñez was the manager of the neighboring Santa Anita Farm and our families visited each other frequently and invited each other over for dinner.

#### 1961

The Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to enter space on board the spaceship Vostok on April 12.

Licha’s health continued to decline. In the month of April, we decided to use our annual vacation to make a trip to Antigua to visit Doctor Julio Aceituno, a friend of ours. He gave Licha a careful examination and finally gave us a letter for us to take to Dr. Carlos Lizama Rubio, a specialist in tumors who had his office on 5th Avenue South, Zone 1 in Guatemala City.

The next day, we went to see Dr. Lizama and asked for an appointment. They gave us an appointment two days later. Dr. Lizama was young, friendly and charismatic. We went into his office and after a long and meticulous examination a biopsy was taken and sent to a laboratory. We were told to return the following day. We did this and once again he examined her minutely and, after a long interrogation, he informed us a surgical intervention was needed as soon as possible. He left it up to us to set the date.

As we were about to leave, he indicated that he wanted to talk to me alone. We left Licha in the waiting room and I entered the clinic again. The doctor said to me, “Mr. Morales, Mrs. Elisa’s case is very serious. The laboratory results confirmed what I already knew. It is a malignant tumor, very advanced and certainly incurable. The cancer has passed the halfway point of the thorax. So with or without an operation I calculate she has three months to live. The only thing is that if we operate her end will be less painful.”

We agreed that he would do the surgery in the Spanish Hospital. The cost was Q. 200. One detail I cannot forget is that the Doctor told me that if I had no money I could pay him later. I thanked him for the confidence he placed in me but that, “Yes, we had the money to defray the expense.” What doctor does this? Especially since he knew that I lived in another country. Very few!

Certainly I left the clinic with a downcast heart but, trying to make the best of a bad situation, there was nothing else to do than to tell Licha that the Doctor’s opinion was that the operation had to be done quickly so she could recover quickly. Upon returning to Antigua, I told her mother and all of Licha’s siblings what the doctor had said to me without hiding anything. Everyone agreed that it was best to go through with the operation and leave the results in the hands of God.

On the agreed upon date, Dr. Lizama did the operation to remove the ovaries and begin a treatment with male hormones. Two weeks later, we moved back to Tapachula to continue my work at the farm with the recommendation that we return within a month for a check-up. This was our vacation! Within a few days, Licha showed remarkable improvement. Her appetite returned, she put on weight and she looked better. The pains disappeared.

On June 6th our oldest daughter Rosa María celebrated her 15th birthday. A Mass was celebrated in the chapel of the Guadalupana Constancia y Trabajo School in Tapachula. The sponsors were our friends Gustavo Gálvez Pérez and his wife Matilde Khobe. The ceremony was well attended, as was the breakfast.

#### 1962

In August the wall that divided the City of Berlin into two parts was built.

A year after the surgery, Licha’s problems returned, mainly a cough and respiratory problems. Nodules appeared on her head and thorax. Her voice changed, her condition became serious again and a fuzz of hair appeared on her cheeks. Dr. Lizama had let us know in advance that, as a consequence of the hormones he prescribed, the fuzz might appear and her voice might change. In the month of October, she was admitted to the Bella Aurora Hospital that was only recently opened and in the midst of construction. Dr. Lizama operated for the second time. This time he took out the tumor, making a hole that reached to below her armpit. She recovered again in a short time. Upon leaving the hospital after the operation the Doctor told us to be very careful and not let her fall because her bones were very fragile. Her bones could fracture because in her youth she had not been involved in sports. He told me that often people who suffered from cancer of the breast also had osteoporosis so the bones were very easily broken.

On the 1st of September, our daughter Elisa Angelina celebrated her 15th birthday. The sponsors were Carlos Quiñonez and his wife Alicia Armendariz. The Mass, the breakfast and the cutting of the cake took place in the chapel and dining room of the Guadalupana Constancia y Trabajo School in Tapachula.

One particular day, I received a letter from Guatemala signed by Mr. Walter Widmann, trustee of the firm Nottebhom, offering me the management of the Las Viñas Farm located in the department of Santa Rosa with a salary of $400.00 USD monthly, a car for my service and other additional benefits. The letter reminded me that the farm was in my homeland and a relatively short distance from the capital city. In a conversation that Mr. Widmann had with Carlos Lehnohff, my name had been mentioned as the person who could the job. I showed the letter to Licha to get her opinion. She told me that our children were doing well in schools in Tapachula and that they would have problems with the educational programs in Guatemala since the two systems were different in various aspects. For this reason, she preferred that we not move again.

During the night of December 23 while Licha was sleeping, she rolled over on her arm. Immediately she felt a deep pain in her arm. Afterward she could hardly move her arm. The next morning I carried her to Tapachula to the office of Dr. Guillermo Arzate Jauregui, a military doctor and an orthopedist. He took several x-rays and told us that the bone was fractured. He put it in a cast. From that day forward we became friends with the doctor and his wife. We visited every so often sometimes in their residence in Tapachula and other times they came to our house on the San Enrique Farm.

#### 1963

Two months after Licha’s arm broke, the cast was removed, an x-ray was taken and the bone was perfectly healed.

On March 5th I received the painful news that my brother-in-law Carlos Atilio Bocaletti Gramegno had died suddenly in Guatemala City, the victim of an attack of a stroke. Licha was much affected by this news. He was about six years younger than Licha.

On June 13, Licha and I went together to Guatemala for the last time. We made a routine visit to Dr. Lizama’s office and she was, at least in appearance, well enough. We returned to Tapachula on the 28th of the month. A few weeks later, we were napping during the afternoon break. When she got up she fell and found that she could not stand up. The pain intensified. I quickly telephoned the doctor in the Mexican Institute of Social Security clinic at Maravillas, Dr. Francisco Muñoz Osorio and he immediately came to San Enrique. After examining Licha, he ordered her carried in an ambulance to the hospital in Tapachula.

#### The bones looked like sponges

As soon as she arrived x-rays were taken that showed a fracture in the femur. She was admitted to the hospital complex under the care of Dr. Guillermo Arzate Jauregui. He was our friend and saw that she was treated with respect. He ordered x-rays of the entire body and these showed that osteoporosis had invaded all of the skeletal system. He took me aside and showed me the x-rays. It was surprising! All the bones looked like sponges or rotten wood.

The Doctor gave me the drawings and instructions so that a carpenter who specialized in orthopedic devices could make a device of cedar that could keep the leg high while one lay down or sat on a chair. She stayed in the hospital for three weeks and when she was allowed to leave we carried her once again to the farm. Dr. Francisco Muñoz Osorio came periodically to inject her with Demerol to lessen the pain.

My mother-in-law Angelina Gramegno de Bocaletti died in Antigua Guatemala on November 5 at 85 years of age. Because of Licha’s delicate state of health and so as to not complicate the situation, I opted not to tell Licha about her mother’s death.

During the second week of December, my in-laws Clara, Angelina and Enrique Bocaletti, accompanied by Arturo Mirón Aceituno, Angelina’s husband, came to the farm. Enrique and Arturo stayed only two days and then continued on their journey to Mexico City where they had business.

Licha’s health continued to deteriorate. The pain was greater and came with greater frequency. The color of her skin was ashen, she lost weight every day and in general she looked like an old woman. She received injections of Demerol with greater frequency so that she stayed in a semi-conscious state. Clara and Angelina stayed with us until the end, trying to consol her but all was in vain. At 8:30 in the morning of December 18, after suffering terrible pain but still lucid, she took her last breath.

At 3:30 in the afternoon of the following day, she was buried in the Municipal Cemetery in Tapachula accompanied by her friends and fellow-workers. My cousins by marriage, Bertha and José Luis Solórzano Bocaletti were also present. They made the trip from Antigua and arrived in time for the funeral. As a final word in this drama, I offer my infinite gratitude to the Doctors Carlos Lizama Rubio, Guillermo Arzate Jaureguí and Francisco Muñoz Osorio for the efforts they made to mitigate the suffering of my wife. They struggled to provide the best care out of no personal interest of their own.

#### Religious affairs

News of the assassination of the President of the USA John F. Kennedy in the City of Dallas, Texas on November 22 shocked the world.

Let’s take a look back in time to remember some things that happened before the death of my wife.

The Mother Superior of the Guadalupana School Constancia y Trabajo, where our three girls studied, was Mother Virginia Torres M. She was very nice, young and with modern ideas that produced substantial changes in the educational system of the students. The boarding students enjoyed greater freedom than previously without losing the discipline that must prevail in every center of education. The building was remodeled and many changes were made to the interior to increase their functionality. I say this because previously the school had been under the care of Mother Superior Carmen Magaña, a person of mature age who ideas were old and conservative. To give an example, when the nuns and the children made an excursion to the ocean, the students were not permitted to swim in bathing suits. They had to put a shirt on top of the bathing suit so that they were covered from the neck to the knees. What do you think of that?

When we still lived on the El Portillo farm, a pastoral mission of the Bishop of Tapachula, Doctor Adolfo Hernández Hurtado, arrived at the Maravillas Farm. Taking advantage of the fact that the team was doing confirmations there, we managed to get our youngest three children Rodolfo, Angelina and Haydée confirmed as well. Rodolfo’s sponsor was the farm’s accountant Mister Antonio Colunga Espinosa and the sponsor of Angelina and Haydée was Mrs. Bertha Grotewold, the wife of Mister Carlos Lehnhoff.

For many years, we were friends with the Bishop of Tapachua. He was very famous, charismatic and quite young for the high job that he held. One time he offered Mass at San Enrique. Since we lacked a church, the ceremony took place in the room where I had installed the movie theatre. After the Mass, he came to our house for breakfast with our family.

#### 1964

Mister Enrique Besche, who had been the manager of the San Enrique Farm before me, had gone on to be the General Manager of the four farms belonging to Mr. Luttman. He retired and he and his wife moved their place of residence to Mexico City. He received an old-age pension from the Mexican Institute of Social Security. Years later he died, the victim of cancer of the throat. Upon Mr. Besche’s retirement, Mister Christian Humberto Lucas, a German, was named to fill the vacancy in the management of Mister Luttman’s farms. He was active and competent, a jolly character and friendly with his subordinates.

On September 16, the anniversary of the independence of Mexico, my dear friend and Godmother of my children Alicia Armendoriz de Quiñonez died tragically. That afternoon I was at the Cordova playing fields in the city of Tapachula watching a soccer match in the company of my Godfather Carlos Quiñonez and my son Daniel who was home on vacation. After a short time, a mutual friend came to us and told Mister Quiñonez that he should go quickly to his brother-in-law’s house because his wife Lichita was very sick. Mister Quiñonez immediately boarded his pick-up and left but Daniel and I went ahead of him in our car and arrived at the house a little before he did.

To our surprise we found the house full of people. They were saying that Mrs. Quiñonez had fired a shot into her brain. She was in horrible condition. Since they treated us like members of the family, we went into the room where the Godmother was lying in agony. It fell on me to witness the last moments of her life. It was very impressive and painful to see that very beautiful woman with half of her face destroyed and one eye hanging outside of its orbit. Her husband arrived after a few minutes but she was already dead.
