---
title: The Third Part
weight: 400
type: essay
---

## The Third Part: Epilogue

#### Edited by Philip Mullins and Rosa María Bocaletti de Mullins

### 1964-1970: School life in Tapachula

The five children left the Miguel Hidalgo and Constancia y Trabajo boarding schools in Tapachula after the school year ended in October 1963 and returned to San Enrique Farm where their parents lived. The coffee harvest at San Enrique was underway but the children, unlike in previous years, were not expected to help. In previous years Daniel, the eldest son, was employed as a helper either in the carpentry shop or on the coffee drying floor and Rosa María and Angelina worked at the sorting tables. Their job was to separate broken or deformed beans from those of better quality. This year Rosa María, who was 17 years old, assumed the care of her terminally ill mother. She slept at the foot of her mother’s bed in case her mother called for her during the night. In December, two of Elisa’s sisters, her brother and a brother-in-law arrived at San Enrique from Guatemala to visit with Elisa for the final time. The two men continued on the Mexico City where they had business to attend to while the two sisters remained at San Enrique. The adults knew that Elisa did not have long to live and, a few days before Elisa’s death, her sister Clara made Elisa’s funeral gown. On the morning of December 18, in the company of her husband, her two sisters and her children, and after months of agonizing pain, Elisa died from bone cancer. The next day she was taken to Tapachula for burial in the Municipal Cemetery. After the funeral, her siblings returned to Guatemala and Mr. Morales and his children returned to San Enrique.

In February 1964, as the annual coffee harvest came to an end, the three younger children (Angelina, Haydée and Rodolfo) returned to the two boarding schools in Tapachula. Daniel, Rosa María and Angelina had all finished the third year of secondary school the year before. Angelina returned to Constancia y Trabajo School to begin a three-year business course, Daniel traveled to Mexico City in January to begin a three-year course in auto mechanics at the Mexican School of Electricity and Rosa María remained at San Enrique to keep house for her father. The three children who were in school in Tapachula continued to come home on the train once a month as was their custom and Mr. Morales continued to make weekly visits to Tapachula to see the children and to sell chickens and eggs. While living at San Enrique, Rosa María enrolled in a correspondence course in dressmaking. She and her father were in mourning and they declined invitations to the frequent gatherings that were a prominent feature of the social life of the isolated and insular coffee farms of southern Chiapas.

#### Post-secondary school

The younger Morales children returned to San Enrique when the school year ended in the fall of 1964. Daniel remained in Mexico City where he had a job as a salesman for Radio Centro (now known as Televisa). He went door-to-door placing stickers on radio dials to mark the company’s five radio stations and offering prizes to the stations’ listeners.  Rodolfo finished primary school at the Miguel Hidalgo School in Tapachula and, at the end of the holidays in February 1965, joined his older brother in Mexico City to enroll in the ‘Vazco de Quiroga’ Secondary School. He and Daniel roomed together.

Rosa María, Angelina and Haydée returned to school in Tapachula. Rosa María boarded in the dormitory at the Constancia y Trabajo School with her sisters and took morning classes in dressmaking at the Luttmann Academy (where Elsa Luttmann was the Principal). In the afternoon, Rosa volunteered as a 4th-grade teacher in a free school for poor children run by the same Guadalupana nuns who operated the Constancia y Trabajo School. On Saturday, she and other graduates from the school joined the nuns to teach confirmation classes to young people at the Villa de Guadalupe Church in Tapachula.

As a graduation exercise at the end of the year when the study of dressmaking ended, the academy’s principal Miss Elsa Luttmann organized a fashion show at the County Club to show the dresses made by the graduating students. Haydée modeled a wedding dress made by her sister Rosa María. The show was well received and received applause from the many persons in attendance.

In the fall of 1965 Rosita, Angelina and Haydée returned to the San Enrique Farm for the school holidays. Angelina and Haydée returned to school in Tapachula in February 1966 but Rosa María stayed at San Enrique where she exercised her profession by making and selling lady’s dresses, mostly for the daughters of Carlos Quiñonez: Malicha, Lupita and Cristy.

#### The social round

It was customary for the farms of the area to sponsor periodic get-togethers of the families of the owners, farm administrators, the medical doctors from the Social Security clinic at Maravillas, the judges from the municipal court at Maravillas, etc. The place of the get-togethers rotated. Sometimes if there was a birthday to celebrate, the parties were enlivened by a marimba band or by singers accompanied by guitars. Usually the older persons that attended were the following: Efraim Piñeda and his wife Concha; David Schroeder and his wife Dora; Horacio Schroeder and his wife Sonia; Daniel Morales; Carlos Quiñonez; Felix Pount and his wife; Francisco Ruiz and his wife; Humberto Penagos and his wife and Lorenzo Carrasco and his wife. The persons mentioned above were administrators or employees of the farms.

Among the owners who attended were: Adolfo Gramlich and his wife from ‘Rancho Alegre’ Farm; Waly Petters from ‘Irlanda’ Farm; Arturo Gerkhe and his wife from ‘El Calmo’ Farm; Miguel Bustamante and his wife from ‘Las Perlas’ Farm; Felipe Lopezlena and his wife Alicia Lopezlena; Doctor Casimiro Galvez; Javier del Piño, the judge from Maravillas; Doctor Francisco Muñoz Osorio and his wife; Doctor Julio Castellanos and his wife; Walter Gordillo; Arturo Escobar Molina and Doctor Rosales Colombiano.

Finally the young people who attended were: Fritz and Rodolfo Gramlich; Malicha, Lupita and Cristy Quiñonez; David and Horacio Schroeder Jr.; Daniel, Rodolfo, Rosa María, Elisa Angelina and Haydée Morales; David Hidalgo, Lorenzo, Tito, Olga amd Belkis Carrasco and Felipe, Letty and Licha Lopezlena.

As you can imagine, the parties were frequent and happy. During the rainy season, on many occasions the partygoers splashed through mud puddles and pushed their cars when they got stuck but they always arrived at their destination. Rosa María and her father participated in the social round that consisted of gatherings for birthdays, anniversaries, holidays and other occasions. Some of the events were for women only but most involved from twenty to thirty individuals, mostly the administrators and owners of coffee farms in the immediate area. These dinner parties were the focal point of social life for the adults as well as their children. The parties rotated among the different farms and great effort was made to attend the gatherings despite terrible travel conditions, especially during the rainy season in the fall of the year. The roads were not paved and in many cases were barely more than trails through the forest. The roads turned to muddy quagmires during the rainy season that lasted from June or July until August or September. Once when Mr. Morales and his children were traveling to Rancho Alegre, the Willis Jeep they were traveling in slipped into a deep mud hole. Mr. Morales and his children struggled to free the car from the mud for much of the night and returned to San Enrique covered in mud. Their hosts, the Gramlich family, had prepared a special meal of rabbit and they waited up most of the night for their guests who never arrived.

#### The children found work in Tapachula

In the fall of 1966, Daniel and Rodolfo both returned from their studies in Mexico City. Daniel had graduated from trade school with a technician’s diploma in auto and diesel mechanics, having paid his way by working part-time in a variety of sales jobs. His final job as a student in Mexico City was that of a commission salesman for automotive fluids. His principal customers were automotive oil change shops. Upon his return to Chiapas, Daniel found work as the service manager at Automotriz Costeña, the Renault dealership in Tapachula. He worked at the Renault agency for one and a half years.

His brother Rodolfo left secondary school in Mexico after two years. He lacked one year to graduate but he did not want to continue in school. With his characteristic frankness, he told his father that he would prefer to devote his time to work and not continue spending money on school. With his father’s consent, he went to the Hamburgo Farm and interviewed for a job. The owner of the Hamburgo coffee farm, Mr. Harold Edelmann, gave Rodolfo a job in the farm office. Haydée, the youngest child, completed secondary school and enrolled in the three-year business course at the Constancia y Trabajo School. Instead of living in the school dormitory, she boarded with the Felipe Lopezlena family in Tapachula during her last year of school in 1968.

In October 1966, Angelina graduated from the business course at the Guadalupano Constancia y Trabajo School with the title of Private Accountant. Mr. Christian Humberto Lucas, the General Manager of Mr. Luttman’s farms, asked her to work at Las Maravillas Farm as a secretary. Las Maravillas Farm was the administrative center for Mister Luttman’s four coffee farms including the San Enrique farm where Mr. Morales was the administrator. Angelina accepted the job and worked in Mister Luttman’s office as a secretary. She held that position for a year and a half.

(Editor’s note: The manuscript written by Daniel Morales López ended with an entry for 1966. Philip Mullins and Rosa María Morales Bocaletti de Mullins wrote the remainder of the story.)

In 1968 Daniel, Rosita (Rosa María), Angelina and Haydée rented an apartment together in 13th Street West in Tapachula. The younger son, Rodolfo, was still employed at Hamburgo Farm. Hamburgo Farm was high on the slopes of the Sierra Madre de Chiapas some distance from Tapachula but Rodolfo managed to join his brother and his three sisters in Tapachula on most weekends. Angelina and Haydée found work in Tapachula as secretaries. In 1968, Daniel left the Renault agency and opened his own auto repair shop. He also worked as a part-time bus driver for the Constancia y Trabajo School. The oldest daughter, Rosa María, maintained the apartment and made custom dresses for private clients, most of who were young professional women with whom she had attended school.

At about this time, Roberto Ruiz Austurias, a friend of the family from Guatemala, moved to Tapachula. He knew the Morales Bocaletti family from their annual Holy Week visits to Antigua Guatemala where they both had relatives. Roberto sought out Daniel and briefly lived in the same rooming house as did Daniel before Daniel moved into the apartment with his sisters. When Roberto asked for help finding a job, Daniel gave him his job driving the bus for the Constancia y Trabajo School. Roberto frequently visited the apartment where the Morales children lived, eating supper there and then staying late to talk with Angelina. He and Angelina, who was eighteen years old, fell in love. Daniel disapproved of the relationship but, after knowing each other for a few months, Roberto and Angelina eloped and went to live in Antigua Guatemala where Angelina’s aunt Mata (Matilde Urquizu de Bocaletti) helped them get established. She loaned them furniture. The following June, Roberto Antonio Ruiz Morales, the first of their nine children, was born in Antigua Guatemala. Shortly afterward, Roberto and Angelina moved to Guatemala City where they lived for many years. They later moved to Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa, a market town on the Pan-American Highway, where their children grew up.

### 1970-1979: Retirement

After Haydée graduated from technical school with a diploma in accounting, she worked as a secretary at several businesses, including an insurance company owned by Mister Chang. Eventually, she was hired as the office manager for an insurance agency owned by Don Luis Monrroy. In July 1970, Daniel, Rosa María and Haydée moved to a second-floor apartment at #54 6th Avenue North. Daniel enlarged his auto repair shop and added a retail counter for auto parts. In February of the following year, Daniel married María de la Luz (Marilu) Duque Gallegos who worked as a secretary at the Tapachula office of Singer Sewing Machines. The couple moved to a house belonging to Daniel’s mother-in-law, Dona Hermisenda (Chendy) Duque. Haydée and Rosa María continued to live in the rented apartment on 6th Avenue North until they moved to the town of Cacahoatan in 1976.

In March 1972, Rodolfo took a leave of absence from the Hamburgo farm and traveled to Canada with Gustavo Parlange, Guillermo Jaeger and Pancho Ruiz, all of whom had been his classmates at the Miguel Hidalgo College. Pancho Ruiz knew two young men from Mexico City (Pancho Ohem and Oton Ortéz) and they told him about a leather shop in Toronto where they had found a welcome two years before. The young men from Tapachula flew to Toronto and went to the Ragnarokr leather shop that occupied a large two-story building in downtown Toronto. They explained that they were friends of Pancho Ohem and Oton Ortéz and were offered a place to stay behind the leather shop. After a few weeks in Toronto, the men traveled to southern Ontario where they found jobs as laborers on tobacco farms located on the belt of sandy soil on the north-central shore of Lake Erie. After working for four months on different farms, the men reunited, returned to the leather shop in Toronto and then left for Mexico in July. Gustavo Parlange elected to stayed in Toronto and enrolled in a college-level course in hotel management at Humber College. After Rodolfo returned to Tapachula, he joined his brother Daniel at Daniel’s small auto-parts store on 6th Avenue North. A year later, in October 1973, Rodolfo married María Guadalupe Chang Bolaños.

#### Sight seeing in Central America

In the spring of 1973, Mr. Morales and his daughter Rosa María were invited to accompany Miss Paula DeCuir on a sightseeing trip through Central America to see the Panama Canal. Paula and Rosa María had been classmates and were best friends. Mr. Morales went along as the chaperon. The three of them traveled on the Pan-American Highway that skirts the Pacific coast in Paula’s car. Their first stop was in San Salvador, the capital of El Salvador. They toured Lake Ilopango on the outskirts of San Salvador before proceeding to the city of Tegucigalpa in Honduras. In Tegucigalpa, they visited Leona Park where dozens of venders sold lottery tickets in the open air in the shade of the large trees that grow in the park. The travelers then passed through the city of Leon on their way to Managua, Nicaragua. In Managua, the damage caused by the December 23, 1972 earthquake was still very evident. After a couple of days in Managua, they passed on to San José in Costa Rica. They found all the hotels in San José booked for a festival of some kind but were able to locate a room in a small but apparently well-kept hotel or “posada”. That night, they were assaulted by hundreds of voracious fleas that were well hidden during the day but emerged in the middle of the night to torment their Mexican guests. The next night, the tourists were in the city of David, Panama and the following day they made their way on the Panama National Highway to Balboa, the western terminus of the Panama Canal. They crossed to the southern-side of the canal and drove over the mountains to the Caribbean terminus of the canal. They drove to the Gatun Locks to watch a pair of ships being pulled through the locks by small tractors called “mules”. This marked the halfway point of the trip. The trip to Panama lasted two weeks. When their vacation was over, Mr. Morales and Paula returned to their jobs at San Enrique and the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) respectively.

In February 1974, Philip Mullins and Mary Rauton from the Ragnarokr leather shop in Toronto arrived in Tapachula to visit Rodolfo and his family. The two Canadians spent a few days in Tapachula at the apartment on 6th Avenue and then accompanied Rodolfo, Haydée and Rosa on a visit to Mr. Morales at San Enrique that is about an hour and a half from Tapachula. Rodolfo and the two Canadian visitors then traveled to Guatemala where Philip and Mary purchased sandals and bags for sale in their retail store in Toronto and Rodolfo purchased supplies for the auto-parts store in Tapachula.

#### She was arrested for smuggling drugs

Ricardo Seminario, a native of Peru who had also lived at the leather shop in Toronto, was in Tapachula at the same time while waiting for permission to re-enter Canada. He and a friend from Peru named Javier were both staying with the Morales Bocaletti children when Philip and Mary visited Tapachula. A few weeks after the Canadians had gone, police found a scrap of paper with Javier’s name in the possession of a woman who was arrested in Mexico City on a drug smuggling charge. The police in Tapachula arrested the two Peruvians and detained both Rodolfo and his father for questioning. Mr. Morales was visiting with his children at the apartment on 6th Avenue when the police arrived to search the apartment for drugs. At the time of the police raid, Rodolfo and his new wife Guadalupe, the two Peruvians (Ricardo Seminario and Javier) and Rosa María and Haydée were sharing the apartment. The family was watching the Olympic games on a small, color television when the police arrived. After a through and unsuccessful search of the apartment, the police confiscated the television and hauled the men in for questioning.

Mr. Morales was released after being questioned but Rodolfo was kept in jail overnight. The two Peruvians were placed in a cell together and taken for questioning during the night. They were both tortured with electrical shocks. During the torture, Javier died. At the order of the police, Ricardo spent the rest of the night trying to resuscitate his friend. Ricardo knew that Javier was dead but he was afraid to stop his efforts to resuscitate his friend. Ricardo was released in the morning without charges being filed and the police buried Javier in the Municipal Cemetery. Some time later, Javier’s brother arrived from Peru and carried the body home. After several months of waiting for a Canadian visa, Ricardo went to Guatemala and obtained a visa for entry into the United States. He then left to live in Virginia in the United States.

During this time, the Guatemalan Consul in Tapachula, Colonel Maximo Zepeda, began taking his meals at the apartment where Rosa María and Haydée lived. The Colonel lived in an apartment above the Guatemalan Consulate and had a housekeeper who prepared his meals. He knew the Morales Bocaletti family socially and he came to the conclusion that Rosa María was a much better cook than his housekeeper. He asked if Rosa María could prepare all of his meals. She agreed and the Colonel came to the apartment on 6th Avenue three times a day to eat breakfast, lunch and the evening meal with the Morales Bocaletti children and their friends. This arrangement continued for about two years. Colonel Zepeda returned to his family’s residence in Guatemala City every weekend and sometimes Rosa María took the opportunity to travel with him to visit her sister Angelina or her cousin Enrique Bocaletti, both of whom lived in Guatemala City. The Colonel and Rosa María traveled in the Colonel’s Jeep with a bodyguard, who also was the driver. They drove to the Colonel’s house on Friday and then returned to Tapachula together on Monday. The Colonel and his bodyguard traveled fully armed and the Colonel’s home in Guatemala City was built to withstand rifle fire. Despite his precautions, Colonel Zepeda was assassinated two or three years later while traveling between Esquintla and Guatemala City in his government-issued Jeep.

#### Morelia, Michocan

When the Renault agency in Tapachula went bankrupt Daniel assumed the factory warranty work on Renault cars in Tapachula. He also briefly sold Renault cars in co-operation with a dealer in Morelia, Michocan. After Daniel’s business began to be profitable, a group of three well-financed individuals were given the Renault agency in Tapachula. After the new Renault agency opened in Tapachula, Daniel moved his shop and his two mechanics to Morelia, Michoacán. After a month, one of the mechanics became home sick and returned to Tapachua. The second mechanic returned to Tapachula soon afterward leaving Daniel to work by himself.

Daniel received a letter from his father advising him that the son of a close friend, Gustavo Galvez, had died. He asked Daniel to go to Mexico City and convey his regrets. Mr.. Galvez had a car wash and an auto repair shop. He asked Daniel to join him as foreman of the business. After a month, Daniel accepted the offer and moved his wife and children to Mexico City.

After two years, Mr. Galvez offered to sell the business to Daniel but, not wanting to live in Mexico City, Daniel turned the offer down. Mr. Galvez found another buyer and Daniel accepted an offer to open a repair shop in Tuxtla Gutierrez, Chiapas. His partner owned a chain of pharmacies. Unfortunately, when construction on the shop was nearly finished, Daniel’s partner, Yukio, was killed in an accident and plans to open the shop derailed.

At the time, the Federal commission of electricity was building a hydroelectric plant at the town of Chicoasen near Tuxtla Gutierrez. Daniel, his brother Rodolfo and another friend by the name of Roberto Ahumada all worked as drivers at the hydroelectric dam for about a year. At the end of the year, Daniel’s father-in-law, who was a partner in a bus company called Autobuses Paulino Navarro, asked Daniel to return to Tapachula to help run the Cuidad Hidalgo-Tapachula-Puerto Madero bus route.     

#### A trip to Toronto

In April 1975, Mr. Morales and Rodolfo accompanied Rosa María and two of her friends on a trip through the United States to Canada. The group, consisting of Mr. Morales, Rodolfo, Rosa María, Paula DeCuir and Miss Francisca Ramos, traveled in Paula’s automobile to visit Ricardo Seminario in Virginia. After touring Washington, D.C. the group traveled to the city of Chicago to visit another friend. From there they went to Montreal in Canada. They were in Montreal when a late snowstorm blanketed the city with four or five inches of snow. This was the first time any of them had seen snow and they were totally unprepared for it. The three women purchased winter boots while Mr. Morales and Rodolfo, acting on the advice of a local resident, went to a bar for a drink of scotch to ward off the cold.

A few days later, the group arrived in Toronto, Ontario where they had friends at the Ragnarokr leather shop. The three women moved into an upstairs room at the leather shop at 33 Baldwin Street. Rodolfo and Mr. Morales stayed in Toronto for a week and then took a bus back to Tapachula. The three girls enrolled in an English-as-a-second language course at a school on College Street. Paula and Francisca, both of whom worked at the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) in Tapachula, had taken a leave of absence from their jobs. In July, before the termination of her leave of absence from her job, Francisca returned to her job in Tapachula and Rosa and Paula found work in a shoe factory in downtown Toronto. They continued to live above the leather shop and to work in the shoe factory until November when they both returned to Mexico in Paula’s car.

Three more grandchildren were born to Mr. Morales in the spring of 1976. By then, his oldest son Daniel had two children, Angelina (in Guatemala City) had four children, Rodolfo had two and Rosa María, who was single, had a daughter. By the end of the year, after Angelina’s fifth child and fourth son, Max, was born, Mr. Morales had ten grandchildren. By then, he was 67 years old and ready to retire from his career as a farm administrator.

#### Retirement

Mr. Morales had been preparing for his retirement for some years by paying into the Mexican Social Security pension plan at the highest possible rate and by saving money to buy a retirement home. In July 1976, he purchased a large house in the mid-sized market town of Cacahoatan about 20 kilometers from Tapachula on Highway 200. The town of Cacahoatan is located in the foothills of the Sierra Madre of Chiapas on the lower slopes of the Tacaná volcano. The volcano, the highest in Central America, towers over the town although its peak is only rarely visible through the cloud cover. The town, at an elevation of about 700 meters above the sea, is noticeably cooler than Tapachula.

In August 1976, Mr. Morales’ two daughters, Rosa María and Haydée and Rosa’s daughter Wendy, moved from Tapachula to the house in Cacahoatan. Mr. Morales continued to work at San Enrique Farm until he retired about a year later. Haydée commuted to her job with Don Luis Monrroy on Calle Central Poniente in Tapachula in a car belonging to her father and Rosa María began a catering business from her father’s house.

Mr. Morales and his children were not Mexican citizens and did not participate in Mexican politics. However, his daughters-in-law were Mexicans and came from locally prominent families that were politically connected. His son Daniel’s father-in-law, Mr. Ricardo Duque, was a partner is a company that owned and operated interurban buses. He also played a leading role in the local amateur soccer federation. Rodolfo’s father-in-law, Mr. Antonio Chang, owned a gravel pit and sold and delivered building materials. Like most Mexicans, they belonged to organizations that were allied with the ruling political party, the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI). The PRI dominated politics in Chiapas and its candidates occupied almost all political offices in the state. The State of Chiapas was then and remained for many years a stronghold of the leftwing of the PRI. In the fall of 1976, the PRI candidate for President of Mexico, Lopez Portillo, carried Chiapas by a large margin. He also won the national vote and was inaugurated President of Mexico in December.

After Mr. Morales retired in 1977, he and his two daughters lived at his home in Cacahoatan. Haydée continued to work as office manager for Mr. Luis Monrroy. Mr. Monrroy sold a line of insurance as well as agricultural seeds. He also owned and managed several farms. Haydée managed his office in downtown Tapachula that was a few blocks from the center of town. Daniel, Mr. Morales’ eldest son, worked with his father-in-law in the bus company, operating local routes between Tapachula and the Guatemalan frontier town of Cuidad Hidalgo. Daniel later purchased a large diesel touring bus that offered long-distance service to Oaxaca and points north. Rodolfo, the younger son, worked as a sales agent. He sold agricultural chemicals and managed a farm for a pair of engineers who had a variety of business interests including several farms. He purchased his father-in-law’s home on 9th Avenue North in Tapachula and remodeled it into an up-scale, modern home. Angelina and her husband Roberto Ruiz lived in Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa in the Department of Esquintla in Guatemala, an hour and a half (85 km) from Tapachula on the Pan-American Highway. Roberto worked at a number of jobs over the years before finally becoming established as the operator of a bus service connecting Santa Lucia and a small town in the nearly mountains.  

Between 1976 and 1985, Rosa María operated a catering service in Cacahoatan. She specialized in baked goods. A large part of her business was children’s birthday parties. She also continued to make and sell custom-order women’s clothing. In the fall of 1978, she and her infant daughter lived for three months in Guatemala City with her cousin Enrique Bocaletti and his wife Norma while Rosa María took a course in machine knitting with the Singer Sewing Machine Company. When she returned to Cacahoatan in September 1978, she and her father opened a small grocery store in a shed behind the house in that had been the garage. Most of her customers were children who attend a public school across the street from the store. She sold soft drinks and snacks to the students from the school and groceries to the neighboring families. Rosa María also slowly built up her catering business.

Until 1823 Chiapas was a part of Guatemala and it was not until 1882 that the border with Guatemala was finally fixed at its current location. Ethnically and culturally, the people of Chiapas are as much Guatemalan as Mexican. This is especially true of the southeast coastal region around the City of Tapachula that is called the Soconusco. There is much coming and going across the border. Many Guatemalan farm workers cross into Chiapas to work and ambulatory venders from Guatemala circulate throughout the Soconusco selling their products door-to-door. The products they offer range from bread to dinnerware. These venders carry their goods on their backs along the footpaths that connect the towns, villages and hamlets of the region. The wares they sell come from Guatemala and are frequently contraband. On one occasion, Rosa María purchased a pair of small child-size chairs for her daughter from such a vender and realized that she could use these chairs in her business. She contracted to purchase a dozen chairs weekly from the traveling vender until she had one hundred chairs. She painted fifty of the chairs pink and the other fifty blue and rented them to her catering customers for children’s birthday parties.

### 1980-1989: Cacahoatan

In February 1980, Haydée married Salvador Lara with the intention of moving to Chicago in the USA where he had lived previously. When the newly weds returned from their honeymoon, they moved into Mr. Morales’ house at Cacahoatan briefly before moving to a rented house in Tapachula. Salvador worked at the Rialfer department store and Haydée worked in Don Luis’ office. After several months, Haydée and her husband separated and Haydée moved back to her father’s house. In December, their son Marco Vinicio was born. Mr. Lara took no interest in his son and Haydée raised Marco as a single parent. The two sisters (Rosa María and Haydée) worked together to raise their children. Rosa María cared for Marco at home in Cacahoatan while Haydée worked in Tapachula. Haydée transported Wendy to and from her kindergarten classes in Constancia y Trabajo School in Tapachula in Mr. Morales’ car.

By 1980, Daniel and Marilu had three children, the oldest of whom was eight years old. Daniel owned and operated one or two buses that ran between Cuidad Hidalgo, on the Guatemalan border, and the city of Tapachula. He still operated under the umbrella of his father-in-law’s company, Paulino Navarro. Daniel occasionally offered excursion buses to Mexico City as well. Rodolfo continued to work as a farm manager. He and Guadalupe had two children. Daniel and Rodolfo and their families both lived in Tapachula.

Mr. Morales, Rosa María, Haydée and the two grandchildren continued to live at Mr. Morale’s house at #9 9th Avenue South and 6th Street West in Cacahoatan. They attended Mass at the Santiago Apostol church a few blocks from their home. Rosa María served on the Building Committee of the Santiago Apostol Church. The principal activity of the committee was to prepare and sell meals to parishioners with the proceeds donated to the church’s building fund. The women of the committee also sold food at the annual community fair and organized the cockfights that were a prominent part of the fair. Most of the members of the building committee were also members of the town’s Masonic lodge for women. The town had two Masonic organizations, one for men and anther for women. The women’s lodge was a branch of the Masonic lodge in Quetzatenango, Guatemala. It was called the Centro Femenil Paramasonico. Rosa María was the treasurer of the women’s Masonic group.

#### Rosa María and Philip became penpals

While Rosa María and Paula DeCuir were living in Toronto in 1975, Paula met Mr. Manjet Dhaliwal at the language school where they were studying English. Paula and Manjet, a Sikh from the Punjab region in India, fell in love. In November, Rosa María and Paula returned to Tapachula and Paula returned to her job at the Social Security Institute in Tapachula. However, after a few months, she returned to Canada. Eventually, after a long courtship and a difficult legal process, she and Manjet Dhaliwal married and moved to Edmonton, Alberta in Canada. During the difficult years before her marriage, Paula lived at the leather shop in Toronto and Philip Mullins helped her resolve the legal problems that separated her and Manjit. When Philip and Mary Rauton separated in 1979, Paula suggested that Rosa María and Philip become penpals. For the next two years, Philip and Rosa María wrote back and forth. In March 1984, Philip and his mother Hazel Mullins traveled to Mexico City by train. There Rosa María and her friend Clara Luz De La Torre met them. The following day, the two Americans and Rosa María traveled to Tapachula by bus by way of Oaxaca City. Philip and his mother visited Rosa María’s family in Tapachula and stayed at Mr. Morales’ home in Cacahoatan.

On March 31, Rosa María and Philip were married in the living room of Mr. Morales’ home with Rosa’s family and Philip’s mother as witnesses. A friend from the Masonic lodge, who was also the Municipal President of Cacahoatan, officiated. After the wedding, Philip and his mother returned to the United States by train, leaving Rosa María and her daughter Wendy in Cacahoatan. When Philip returned to Austin, Texas, he applied with the US Immigration Service for residency permits for his wife and stepdaughter. The application languished for a year at the San Antonio office of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). In the meantime, Rosa María assembled the necessary documentation to immigrate to the United States.

During most of the six years that Lopez Portillo served as President of Mexico, the Mexican economy continued to grow at a brisk pace. The Socunosco region of Chiapas is blessed with good volcanic soil and abundant rain that produces two harvests a year of cotton, bananas and grains, all of which were in strong demand on international markets. The government built and improved a deep-water harbor on the Pacific coast at Puerto Madero a few kilometers from Tapachula. Tapachula was inside in a free-trade zone that encouraged commercial trade with Guatemala. Mr. Morales had sent his children to the region’s most prestigious schools and they were now part of a growing middle-class of managers and professionals. In February 1984, Rosa’s daughter Wendy enrolled in ‘Mexico’ School in Tuxtla Chico in the 3rd grade. Rosa María and Haydée purchased a quantity of Panama hats from the village of Becal in the Yucatan and cotton clothing from Oaxaca and shipped them to Philip in Austin, Texas. In 1985, Rosa María’s daughter, Wendy, made her First Communion and Confirmation at the Santiago Apostol church in Cacahoatan. In September 19 and 20, 1985 two strong earth-quakes stuck Mexico City, causing extensive damage, injuring 14,286 persons and destroying the government’s archives.

#### The Petro Economy

Beginning in the late 1970s, Mexico enjoyed an economic boom as the price of crude oil increased from $14 per barrel in 1978 to $35 per barrel in 1981 as a consequence of the Arab Oil Boycott. Mexico’s proven oil reserves also increased and by 1980 crude oil accounted for 65% of Mexico’s exports. Chiapas played an important role in the Mexican economy with 25% of oil production and 80% of the nation’s hydroelectric capacity originating in that state. The federal government borrowed heavily against future oil revenue in an attempt to jump-start the Mexican economy. Between 1977 and 1983, Mexico’s public sector debt increased by $40 billion USD. Unfortunately Mexico’s oil boom lasted only a few years. In February 1982, the bust (in the form of the Peso Crisis) began with the flight of foreign capital in the face of rising inflation and foreign debt. By the time Rosa María’s daughter Wendy finished pre-school at Kindergarten in Tapachula in June 1982, the Peso Crisis was well underway.

In August 1982, Mexico was unable to pay the interest on its $80 billion USD foreign debt. The US government agreed to accelerate its purchase of Mexican crude oil and provided $1 billion USD in guarantees for new commercial bank loans to Mexico. In September, the Mexican government nationalized Mexico’s banks in an attempt to calm the financial markets. The annual inflation rate had reached 100%. In December 1982, Miguel de la Madrid was inaugurated President and announced a 10-point austerity program to reduce government expenditures. During 1983, Mexico’s gross national product (GNP) contracted by 5%. It grew by 3.5% in 1984 and then declined again by 1% in 1985.

In June 1985, Philip moved back to Toronto and applied once again for residency permits for Rosa María and Wendy, this time from the Government of Canada. By February 1986, Rosa María had the Canadian visas in hand and in March she and her daughter Wendy immigrated to Canada. Haydée and Mr. Morales continued to live in Cacahoatan. A few months later, Mr. Morales sold the house in Cacahoatan and he, Haydée and Haydée’s son Marco moved into a rented house in Tapachula while they searched for a house in Tapachula to purchase.

Meanwhile, the economy of Mexico continued its slow motion collapse. Between 1985 and June 1986, crude oil prices dropped 50% and Mexico’s oil export earnings dropped from $14.7 billion USD in 1985 to $7 billion USD in 1986. Government revenue dropped 25%. The governing political party, the Institutional Revolutionary Party (the PRI), split into factions. The PRI was born of the Mexican revolution and had guided the country for sixty years. It included all Mexican political factions except for the extreme right. In July 1987, the party’s leftwing, the Democratic Current, left the PRI and became the opposition National Democratic Front. In 1989, for the first time since 1929, a candidate representing a party other than the PRI won election as a state governor. The decline of the PRI continued. In 2000 the PRI failed to elect its candidate for Mexican president. By 2000 three main parties competed for control of government. Two of the mainstream parties were regional parties with their strength concentrated in either the northern or southern regions of Mexico. The PRI became the centrist party with its strength in central Mexico.  

While Mr. Morales searched for a house in Tapachula, the real value of his cash holdings declined month by month. Between 1982 and 1988, inflation in Mexico averaged 160% annually. On November 18, 1988 the Mexican peso was allowed to float against the US dollar. It dropped 18% overnight and inflation increased to 144%.  The outgoing President formed an Economic Solidarity Pact with labor and industry to control both prices and wages and by August the rate of inflation dropped to 1% a month. (In January it had been 15% per month). This ended the first phase of the Peso Crisis.

### 1990-1999: The Peso Crisis

The Peso Crisis had far reaching effects on the ordinary people of Mexico. Between 1982 and 1988, real income in Mexico fell by 40%. Pensioners on fixed incomes were especially hard hit. The Government made an unsuccessful attempt to index the pensions of those receiving the minimum pension to inflation but by the end of the Peso Crisis all pensioners were receiving a fraction of the pension they had been promised. The value of the monthly pension Mr. Morales received was reduced to $10 USD. Selling the house in Cacahoatan was also a costly mistake. Even though Mr. Morales was receiving interest of up to 60% on his savings, the price of housing in Tapachula rose much faster than the value of his bank account. Mr. Morales was never able to purchase another house. He and Haydée lived in increasingly more humble rental housing until they both left Mexico permanently in 1995. By then the value of Mr. Morales’ savings had been reduced to a little over $1,000 USD. He placed that money in a Certificate of Deposit in an Austin, Texas bank where it was available to pay for his funeral.

In June 1989, Rosa María de Mullins and her family moved from Toronto, Canada to the city of Pensacola in northwest Florida in the United States. That summer, Mr. Morales left Tapachula to live with the Rosa María and her family in Pensacola. He stayed in Pensacola until December when he and Rosa María, Rosa’s husband Philip and her daughter Wendy traveled to Guatemala by way of Miami for a brief visit. While in Guatemala, Mr. Morales invited his son-in-law to attend the annual reunion of the so-called Group of Seven. The Group of Seven was a fraternity of ancient friends from Antigua Guatemala and Guatemala City who meet annually to play cards, smoke, drink whiskey and renew their friendship. In 1989 the group included Enrique Bocaletti, Arutro Miron, Victor Porras, Guillermo Solorzano, Jose Luis Solorzano Bocaletti, Rogelio Toledo, Miguel Ángel Gonzalez, Claudio Augeletti, Carlos Rosales and Daniel Morales. All but Mr. Morales lived in or near Antigua Guatemala. Mr. Morales, even while living in Chiapas, rarely missed these Christmas gatherings. After this visit to Guatemala, Mr. Morales returned to the United States with Rosa María and her family but stayed in Miami, Florida at the home of his cousin, Mrs. Amalia Jordan.

#### Rosa María in Pensacola

Rosa’s brothers Daniel and Rodolfo and their families both visited Rosa María in Pensacola between 1991 and 1993. They were both still living in Tapachula. Daniel was still operating passenger buses and Rodolfo was working as a farm manager. In 1991 Daniel, his wife and three children stopped in Pensacola on their way to a visit to Disneyworld in Orlando. Rodolfo and his family did the same in June 1993. Rodolfo’s daughter Karla returned to Pensacola with Rosa María and Wendy in August 1992 after a visit to Chiapas. Karla enrolled in Catholic High School in the 11th grade with her cousin Wendy. Karla attended Pensacola Catholic High School for the 1992-1993 school year and returned with her parents to Tapachula in the spring. In April 1993, Mr. Morales once again entered the United States from Guatemala and went to Pensacola to live with Rosa María and her family. In the fall Mr. Morales accompanied Rosa María and her family to Austin, Texas after they sold their house in Pensacola and moved to Texas. The following month he returned to Guatemala and then Mexico. While he was in Mexico, Mr. Morales lived with his daughter Haydée who was living and working in Tapachula. When he was in Guatemala, he stayed with his daughter Angelina, her husband Roberto Ruiz and their ten children in Santa Lucia.

The economy of Chiapas was severely damaged by the Peso Crisis. To compound the damage to the state’s economy, at about the same time the price of commodities such as coffee, bananas and cotton began a long slide that continued for the next ten years. The Peso Crisis damaged Tapachula’s value as a port of entry with Guatemala and disrupted the commerce in the free trade zone along the Guatemalan border that included the city of Tapachula. Visitors from Guatemala accounted for a large part of Tapachula’s retail trade. The seemingly endless civil wars in Central America between pro-democracy forces and American-backed oligarchies created a steam of refugees that flowed across the Guatemala border at Tecu Uman, through Tapachula and to the railhead at Tonalá. The flow of migrants disrupted the normal movement of seasonal laborers and ambulatory venders across the border and made the area less stable and more dangerous. The Guatemalan army patrolled the border and occasionally entered Mexican territory in hot pursuit of rebel forces. Groups of armed men appeared in the region.

Rodolfo was robbed at gunpoint while carrying the payroll of a cocoa farm he managed near Tapachula. After 1990 Rodolfo began working as the manager of an experimental farm owned by a large Mexican tobacco firm. As the economy declined and competition for the traveling public increased, Daniel’s business slowly declined. Because many of his clients were tourists from Central America, a competitor informed the police that Daniel was transporting illegal migrants in his long-distance bus that ran to Mexico City. The police suspected him of being part of a smuggling network that carried the Central Americans to the United States. A business partner purchased a set of tires for one the firm’s buses that turned out to be stolen. Because Daniel owned the bus in question, he was accused of the crime, was convicted and briefly sent to a prison near Tapachula. Haydée’s employer, Mr. Luis Monrroy, also fell on hard times. He lost his standing as an agent for the insurance company he had represented for years. As the price of agricultural products fell, he and other area farmers attempted to diversify into vegetables for the American market but found that USDA Agricultural regulations largely prevented them for successfully competing in the United States. Mr. Monrroy toyed with the idea of getting out of agriculture altogether and opening an industrial metal-plating business. As the economy declined everyone, including the small group of middle-class managers (to which the children of Daniel Morales belonged) found that their incomes and their futures were in doubt. Civil unrest increased. In September 1992 5,000 striking coffee workers occupied downtown Tapachula and in January 1994 armed indigenous supporters of the Zapatista National Liberation Army occupied several cities in the central plateau of Chiapas, initiating a stand-off with the Mexican army that continued for twenty years.  

#### The children left Chiapas

In 1992 Rodolfo’s son was admitted to the prestigious Monterrey School of Technology in the city of Queretaro about 100 kilometers north of Mexico City. In 1993 Rodolfo’s wife, Guadalupe, moved to Queretaro to keep house for their son while he attended school. Karla, the only other child, went with her mother to Queretaro. The next year Rodolfo left his job as manager of the experimental farm near Tapachula, moved to Queretaro and began managing a banana warehouse. He purchased green bananas from Chiapas, ripened them using nitrogen gas and sold them from a wholesale grocery market in Queretaro. After Daniel was arrested for buying stolen tires, he sold his remaining bus and he too left Chiapas. He and his family moved to Providence, Rhode Island in the United States where they had friends.

After Mr. Morales sold his home in Cacahoatan, he began to travel frequently. He often spent half of the year visiting family and friends in the United States and the other half visiting family and friends in Guatemala and Chiapas. He almost always stayed in the home of one of his children. When he was in the United States, he stayed with either Rosa María or, after 1995, with Haydée. When he was in Guatemala, he stayed either with his daughter Angelina in Santa Lucia or with his oldest granddaughter Claudia De Rubio in Guatemala City. During this time, his official address was the apartment of his daughter Haydée in Tapachula.

Haydée and Mr. Morales were the last of the Morales Bocaletti family to leave Tapachula. Haydée continued to manage Don Luis’ declining enterprise but by the summer of 1994 she too decided to move to the United States. In January 1995, Haydée’s son, Marco Vinicio Morales, returned to Texas with Rosa María and her family after their usual Christmas visit to Tapachula. In February Mr. Morales cancelled his Mexican immigrant visa (FM2) so he could receive a payout on his IMSS old-age pension. A few months later, he and Haydée left Mexico and went to live with Rosa María and her family in Austin, Texas. Marco enrolled in high school in the 10th grade and Haydée ran a small daycare in Rosa’s home. In April 1996, she and Marco left Austin and moved to Providence, Rhode Island where Haydée’s older brother Daniel and his family were living. In June Mr. Morales too left Austin and returned to Guatemala. He stayed with his granddaughter Claudia de Rubio in Guatemala City until March 1997. In March he once again flew to the United States. This time he traveled to Providence where his son Daniel and his youngest daughter Haydée were both living. He stayed in Providence until October when he flew to Miami where he spent the winter with his cousin Amalia Jordan. After a brief visit to Guatemala, he returned to Providence where he stayed until September. As was his custom he then flew south where he intended to spend the winter months.

### 2000-2002: The Final Years

In December 1998, Mr. Morales purchased a return-trip ticket with the intention of spending Christmas with his daughter Rosa María and her family in Austin, Texas. His intention was to return to Guatemala in early February 1999. During this visit, the hearing aide that he had purchased in Pensacola some years before finally failed and, while having it repaired, the hearing aide technician advised Mr. Morales to have a large build-up of wax removed from his ear. His son-in-law arranged for a visit to a clinic to clean Mr. Morales’ ear. During the brief visit, the attending physician, Dr. Anne Cooper of Seton South Community Health Center, noticed that something was seriously wrong with Mr. Morales’ health. He was admitted to Seton Hospital and within a few weeks he was diagnosed with angina, hypertension and mild congestive heart failure. More importantly, he was found to be anemic as a result of chronic renal disease. A kidney specialist at Seton Hospital suggested that Mr. Morales had a life expectancy of between six months to two years. After this diagnosis, Mr. Morales stopped traveling and stayed with his daughter Rosa María in Austin, Texas.

Mr. Morales suffered a fall some years before while working at the San Enrique Farm. He was caught in the drive-belt of a large machine and, when he was thrown free, he landed on his side on a post.  He was told at the time that this damaged his kidney so the diagnosis of kidney failure came as no surprise to him. He also realized early at the onset of his illness in 1999 that, because of his age, he was not a good candidate for kidney dialysis. Although he knew that he would die without dialysis, he stated his intention to refuse the treatment when “the crisis” caused by renal failure came. In the meantime, because he was an alien tourist with renal failure, the Medicaid program of the US Social Security Administration paid his hospital expenses. Seton Healthcare Network, Austin’s Catholic hospital, paid for some of his treatment and Austin/Travis County Health Department and his son-in-law paid the remainder. Doctor Cooper arranged for him to receive an extremely expensive medication at no cost. This drug, which would not have been available to him had he returned to Guatemala, kept the symptoms of renal failure at bay for a year and a half.

#### The end

However, in March 2002 he was admitted to the county charity hospital after a fall. His health declined rapidly thereafter and he was soon confined to bed. His grandson Marco was dispatched from Providence to help care for his grandfather. Hospice Austin provided care for him at his daughter’s home until the end of April when he was admitted to the Hospice Austin’s Christopher House. He died at Christopher House on April 29, 2002 at the age of 92. On May 2 his children Daniel, Rosa María and Haydée and some thirty-five relatives and friends gathered in Austin for a memorial service. Notices of his death were placed in newspapers in Austin, Texas and Tapachula, Chiapas and he is remembered in a Mass at Saint Ignatius, Martyr church in Austin on the anniversary of his death.

Like millions of Mexicans and Guatemalans, the children of Mr. Morales left the agricultural regions where they were born and raised and moved to centers of industry. None of Mr. Morales’ five children lived in Chiapas between 1995 and 2012. The youngest son, Rodolfo, his wife and married daughter live in the industrial city of Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico where they operated a restaurant for many years. Rodolfo’s son is a sales agent for Monsanto Chemical Company in Mexico. Like some eight million other Mexicans, three of Mr. Morale’s five children moved to the United States. By 2007 of his descendants living in the United States all but one daughter and two grandchildren had become legal residents or citizens. Rosa María, the oldest daughter, lives in Austin, Texas with her American-born husband and her married daughter. The oldest son, Daniel and his two sons, exported used cars and trucks from the United States to Mexico. They purchased the vehicles in New England, transported them to the frontier at Pharr, Texas and sold them from lots in Mexico. Haydée lives and works in Providence, Rhode Island. Angelina and her husband live in Santa Lucia Cotz, Guatemala where they own a fleet of buses that provide transportation services to large-scale sugar cane processors including the Madre Tierra sugar mill. Their sons have assumed the day-to-day operation of the business.

In June 2007 the oldest son, Daniel, purchased a home in the town of San Juan, Texas in the Rio Grande valley. Mr. Morales had stipulated in a letter addressed to his five children that, if he died in the United States, his remains were to be cremated and keep temporarily at his daughter’s home in Austin. Should Daniel purchase a home then Mr. Morales’ ashes were to be divided between the homes of his two oldest children. He stipulated that one-half of the ashes were to be kept at the home of his daughter Rosa María and the other half taken to the home of his oldest son, Daniel. With the purchase of the house in San Juan, Texas, his instructions could be carried out and the ashes of Mr. Morales laid to rest. Instead, his children decided to reunite the remains of their parents. The bones of Elisa were exhumed and cremated. The ashes of Daniel Morales López and his wife Elisa Bocaletti Gramegno were placed in a niche in the Church de Jesús de la Buena Esperanza in Tapachula on December 5, 2014.  
